hello everybody I thought I'd talk today
about t Corona Borealis The Blaze star
this has been all over the media
recently um and they've been talking
about this amazing Celestial event where
this enormous stars going to flare up in
the sky and it'll be absolutely
magnificent whereas I think we should
really perhaps calm down a little bit
and have a little look at the truth and
what's going on why are they making
these predictions what's so special
about t Corona boreales or t Coro or
just
TCB uh for short so let's start well the
uh star itself is in a strange little
constellation that many people have not
heard of called the northern Crown
Corona Borealis it's a nice little uh
group of stars you can usually just see
this sort of loop or cup shape to the
left of the much more visible larger
constellation of bhes the herdsman in
the sky with the bright star Arcturus
acting as a good signpost now it's not
the right time of year for us here in
Cambridge in the UK to see it because
it's disappeared down into the Twilight
it'll be back in the very very early
morning uh shortly and so we'll have to
wait for a better aspect for it to see
it in the uh more civilized evening
hours of the night sky
so T Corona Borealis is a relatively
obscure star you can't see it normally
with the naked eye it's the one that's
illustrated by the enormously bright one
in the picture there but it's not like
that at the moment
and what is it well it's a red star it's
a red giant star in fact and it's 3,000
light years away so that's quite a long
way away uh if you think about it battle
J
the most obvious red giant that we all
know about in the constellation of Orion
that's uh what 600 light years away so
this is five times further away so we
get 25 times more reduction in the light
5 squared is 25 and the square law means
that uh it's going to be correspondingly
much much fainter 25 times fainter if it
was the same power output so that's
pretty faint in fact normally it's 40
times too faint to be able to see with
the naked eye so what's all the fuss
about well let's go back and have a look
about when something interesting was
first recognized about this
star and it goes back to this guy shown
in the uh drawing there John Bing
Birmingham and uh in
1866 he spotted that TCB had suddenly
flared up under gone an outburst and
become really bright it had gone from
being a telescopic object only U that
down around 10th magnitude all the way
up to Second magnitude so as bright as
most of the bright stars in the sky and
blindingly obvious really um and then it
faded away
again now 80 years later a young lad not
so young anymore he's shown in the
picture at the right there this is
Michael Woodman he was 15 years old in
1946 and he saw it do this again um
suddenly saw this really bright star up
here and he reported it to the Royal
astronomer up at greenage in London and
uh this led to it being studied by many
scientists and they realized that it had
in fact flared up again some 80 years
down the road from when uh it was first
seen by John Birmingham back then in
1866 and this is very interesting so we
clearly had what's called a recurrent
Nova a Nova is a star that explodes
outwards and becomes much brighter for a
while and then Fades back we usually
hear that word in the context of
supernova when a star completely
explodes and destroys itself but these
recurrent novas are much less dramatic
than that and they flare
up um and doesn't destroy the star and
so they're able to then calm back down
for a while and then perhaps do it again
depending on what it is that's causing
the flare up well with these two
particular identified outbursts 80 years
apart
1946 if you add 80 to that what number
do you get you get actually um you get
26 um so we're a year early we're
talking about it as being 25 the media
have got hold of the idea and are
talking about it happening anytime soon
but it could be this year it could even
be next year in 2026 before this
happens having discovered this recurrent
Behavior though uh we can look back in
history and see if there were any other
reports of it doing so and if we go all
the way back to the year
127 we find a record in fact in 12 18 a
German monk was looking at the sky and
saw that the faint star was suddenly
shining with uh abnormal brightness it's
recorded as and that's interesting
because he it for him to record it is
normally faint it must have been bright
enough for him to see at that stage so
that's at least magnitude six um perhaps
the skies were very very clear maybe a
little bit more than that but we
normally think of this star all the way
down as magnitude 10 so it was obviously
doing something uh before he identified
that it had really flared
up um and he recorded that it did so for
several days the Abbot name of bushard
the leader of the Abbey in hburg
recorded it in the chronicle and that's
why we have the information he said a
wonderful sign was seen it said the
mysterious object in the constellation
of Corona Borealis Shone with great
light for many days and there's an image
there from the Library of Congress um
and they have uh the uh boes upside down
there and the northern Crown drawn to
the right of it so not the aspect we
normally see um with this star marked on
there as this extra bright
star we also have a recording of a
possible sighting in
1789 by the Reverend Francis walliston
Francis walliston was a clergyman and an
astronomer and this often went together
back in the day um quite a number of
famous astronomers were also in the
clergy I guess they had the time to uh
devote to the the hobby but Francis
walliston was taking it very seriously
he built this machine this contraption
that you see on the right here in the
drawing there which was a Transit
instrument you can see a telescope
mounted in a big wheel in a frame there
and it's only able to move move up and
down and not able to move side to side
um and so he was using this and looking
in through the small telescopes at the
side of the diagram at the coordinates
marked on the big wheel to measure the
altitude the declination above the
Horizon below the celestial equator and
create a catalog of stars and he was
cataloging stars all the way down to
magnitude 8 using the instrument and he
marked the position of this T Corona
Borealis star so it must have been
undergoing an eruption because he put it
in his catalog and he didn't
unfortunately record how bright it was
just recorded the position but he was
only going down to mag 8 so it must have
been brighter than that magnitude 10
that we normally uh think of now things
moved on and in the
1940 1945 1946
eruption uh scientists had learned to
study and measure the magnitude of stars
on a regular basis looking for
variations and tracking their behavior
and we've got this wonderful chart up at
the top right here of the 1946 Outburst
of uh tcv you can see that the magnitude
was rumbling along around about 10 in
1945 it dropped down to about 11 so it
lost about a magnitude there there about
a year prior to it suddenly going way up
off the chart almost there that great
big spike early
1946 going up to magnitude 2 so a
terrific outburst and then it came down
and then went through um a sort of post
Outburst hump back up to eight and then
back down towards 10 again so quite a
complicated uh light curve for the star
now of course that pre dimming in
1945 is considered to be a signpost that
something is about to happen and we saw
the same thing in the light curve in the
middle of
2023 which is what's caused all the
excitement there were a number of
predictions that this was going to flare
up again um and those predictions have
ranged from early
2024 through to the summer and fall of
2024 uh through to now to the early part
of uh 2025 as I'm making this recording
um and some people are saying well
actually it should be next year 2026 but
as I said the media got hold of this
story and it's been all over the place
uh prompting me toh put this video
together and talk about it for you so
let's have a look at that that graph in
a little bit more detail there with that
pre-eruption dip the enormous rise in
the brightness the outburst and then
that strange light curve where it it uh
has the hump about 6 months down the
road and it may be that that hump is
what some of the observations of those
of John Bingham and so on were saying
it's coming up above that eighth
magnitude where he was making the
measurements so what's going on what do
we really know about this star well when
we look at it it looks red and we can
measure the brightness and we can
estimate the distance around about 3,000
light years and you can work out whether
or not you think it's uh um a small star
or a large one and for that brightness
at that distance it must be a red giant
star that we're observing but when you
look at the Spectrum there's something
interesting about it now what happens
with the life cycle of stars is they get
borne out of a cloud of gas and
depending on how large they are they
take one of a number of different
evolutionary Roots they can become a a
small modest St like the sun burn for a
very long time converting hydrogen to
helium in their cores turn into a red
giant when they run short of that fuel
in the core thinks have to rebalance the
core uh turns into a ball of helium it
shrinks down uh you get a shell of
hydrogen then with a larger surface area
burning around it and uh that uh faster
release of radiation forces the star to
swell up to a red giant
eventually though it will shed its outer
layers form a planetary nebula we've got
the picture of the so-called Eskimo
nebula there which is a planetary nebula
the outer layers of the stars have been
blown sideways away out into space these
giant somewhat ragged smoke rings
there's been a number of eruptive
episodes you can see the different
shells of gas there and the little tiny
dot in the center is the leftover dead
nuclear core of the star
the so-called white dwarf um which will
remain once the planetary nebula has
dissipated into the vacuum of space
there um the gases will evaporate they
only last about 50,000 years these
planetary nebula so they're quite
transient really in astronomical terms
whereas the white dwarf will sit there
as the very very high temperature core
of the uh dead star it won't be making
any new energy
by um Fusion at all anymore it will be
just cooling down over eons um and uh
gradually the color will fade and
eventually presumably become a black
dwarf we've never seen that it takes
longer than the age of the universe to
cool down for a larger star you go on
the similar journey through a large star
burning very quickly then a red super
giant similar process of it's swelling
up but then it will undergo several
stages of nuclear fusion and then
perhaps detonate as a supernova when the
end comes and it runs out of fuel and
the core collapses down either to a
neutron star or to a black hole now
that's very interesting um and the
process takes different lengths of time
the large stars live faster and die
younger um and that's key to
understanding what's probably happening
with t Corona
Borealis most stars are born as binary
systems this the Sun is somewhat unusual
in being on its own about 70% of stars
are in binary or multiple systems where
there's two or more stars orbiting
around each other and inevitably nature
being somewhat ragged as it is the Stars
end up being uh a range of masses the
two partners in the binary will be
differently U endowed with material and
so they will run at different rates at
different temperatures be different
colors
and they will burn through the fuel and
the lifetime will be very different the
bigger star will burn through its fuel
faster run through to the red giant
stage the planetary nebula and the white
dwarf or if it's a really massive star
detonate but it will do so uh very much
faster than the lower Mass
companion if we get to the stage where
we had two relatively sunlike Stars One
of them has gone into the red giant
phase died as a planetary nebul and left
a white dwarf behind and the partner
slightly lower Mass is catching up it
will remain as a main sequence star
burning hydrogen for a long time um but
eventually it will swell up as a red
giant as
well and it's very interesting um just a
a look back really at that lifetime
thing again the um diagram shows the
different masses colors and burn rates
of stars at the left hand side the more
massive they are the hotter they burn
and they burn disproportionately faster
so they live less time time going to the
right is in fact in these columns is in
steps of a factor of 10 so the biggest
blue star at the top left there will
only live for 10 million
years um sorry 1 million years and then
we'll blow up um in the 10 million year
column as a
supernova the bluey white stars will
live 10 million and then blow up as a
supernova the white stars three columns
another factor of 10 100 million the
yellowy white ones they die as a
planetary nebula but it takes them four
columns to to reach the end and that's 1
billion years sunlike Stars five columns
and that's 10 billion years and then the
bottom two rows the orange dwarfs 100
million sorry 100 billion and the red
dwarf stars 1 trillion years now those
two columns I haven't put a planetary
nebula at the end that's what we think
they will result in but those two
lifetimes are way longer than the age of
the universe anyway so it's never
happened so this is the idea that big
stars live fast and die young and the
bigger they are the more quickly they
will run through so in our example we
have a sunlike star and perhaps one
that's a little more
massive the more massive one evolves
very rapidly and
becomes a white dwarf
star and uh collapses down and then it's
slightly lower Mass companion swells up
to a red dwarf and begin sorry it swells
up to a red giant star getting very
confused here I apologize red giant star
now the Red Giant star the outer layers
of it are relatively weakly bound
gravitationally that's why they can puff
off their outer layers as planetary
nebula once they reach the the final
stage so it's beginning this Mass loss
and letting the material go from the
outside and their white dwarf with its
very concentrated uh Mass center there
is able to exert quite strong gravity on
any material escaping the Red Giant and
pull it across into a spiral a death
spiral into the white
dwarf falling down onto the center there
and uh being absorbed by the white
dwarf as it does so the disc of material
the so-call accretion disc gets very
very hot indeed and the uh temperature
can rise to the point where it the disc
starts to glow and give off energy
before it's absorbed by the white dwarf
but it's also the case that this can be
a very uh lumpy process and it's those
lumps of material going across from the
red giant down onto the white dwarf that
are causing these flareups in this
accretion process and the interesting
thing is exactly why this repeats every
80 years so it's somewhat surprising
that it's been as regular as Clockwork
and that's why we're very interested to
see whether the predictions of another
flare up uh at which we can study with
all the instruments of modern science
now technology having progressed so much
since the last time in
1946 we'll be able to see and understand
exactly what's going on what the
material is that's causing this flare up
and really understand what's going on
with the blaze star T Corona borealis
and I'll stop there so thank you for
listening and uh do have a look at some
of my other videos and subscribe I don't
make any money out of this um I Do It
For the Love of the science and the
astronomy so thanks very much